A MYSTERIOUS NIGHT IN LONDON

“No time to lose,” said Harry, “come along.”

He called a cab: in an undertone mentioned the number of a house in
some street to the driver; we jumped in, and were off.

As we rattled over the boisterous pavements, past splendid squares,
churches, and shops, our cabman turning corners like a skater on the
ice, and all the roar of London in my ears, and no end to the walls of
brick and mortar; I thought New York a hamlet, and Liverpool a
coal-hole, and myself somebody else: so unreal seemed every thing about
me. My head was spinning round like a top, and my eyes ached with much
gazing; particularly about the corners, owing to my darting them so
rapidly, first this side, and then that, so as not to miss any thing;
though, in truth, I missed much.

“Stop,” cried Harry, after a long while, putting his head out of the
window, all at once—“stop! do you hear, you deaf man? you have passed
the house—No. 40 I told you—that’s it—the high steps there, with the
purple light!”

The cabman being paid, Harry adjusting his whiskers and mustache, and
bidding me assume a lounging look, pushed his hat a little to one side,
and then locking arms, we sauntered into the house; myself feeling not
a little abashed; it was so long since I had been in any courtly
society.

It was some semi-public place of opulent entertainment; and far
surpassed any thing of the kind I had ever seen before.

The floor was tesselated with snow-white, and russet-hued marbles; and
echoed to the tread, as if all the Paris catacombs were underneath. I
started with misgivings at that hollow, boding sound, which seemed
sighing with a subterraneous despair, through all the magnificent
spectacle around me; mocking it, where most it glared.

The walls were painted so as to deceive the eye with interminable
colonnades; and groups of columns of the finest Scagliola work of
variegated marbles—emerald-green and gold, St. Pons veined with silver,
Sienna with porphyry—supported a resplendent fresco ceiling, arched
like a bower, and thickly clustering with mimic grapes. Through all the
East of this foliage, you spied in a crimson dawn, Guide’s ever
youthful Apollo, driving forth the horses of the sun. From sculptured
stalactites of vine-boughs, here and there pendent hung galaxies of gas
lights, whose vivid glare was softened by pale, cream-colored,
porcelain spheres, shedding over the place a serene, silver flood; as
if every porcelain sphere were a moon; and this superb apartment was
the moon-lit garden of Portia at Belmont; and the gentle lovers,
Lorenzo and Jessica, lurked somewhere among the vines.

At numerous Moorish looking tables, supported by Caryatides of turbaned
slaves, sat knots of gentlemanly men, with cut decanters and
taper-waisted glasses, journals and cigars, before them.

To and fro ran obsequious waiters, with spotless napkins thrown over
their arms, and making a profound salaam, and hemming deferentially,
whenever they uttered a word.

At the further end of this brilliant apartment, was a rich mahogany
turret-like structure, partly built into the wall, and communicating
with rooms in the rear. Behind, was a very handsome florid old man,
with snow-white hair and whiskers, and in a snow-white jacket—he looked
like an almond tree in blossom—who seemed to be standing, a polite
sentry over the scene before him; and it was he, who mostly ordered
about the waiters; and with a silent salute, received the silver of the
guests.

Our entrance excited little or no notice; for every body present seemed
exceedingly animated about concerns of their own; and a large group was
gathered around one tall, military looking gentleman, who was reading
some India war-news from the Times, and commenting on it, in a very
loud voice, condemning, in toto, the entire campaign.

We seated ourselves apart from this group, and Harry, rapping on the
table, called for wine; mentioning some curious foreign name.

The decanter, filled with a pale yellow wine, being placed before us,
and my comrade having drunk a few glasses; he whispered me to remain
where I was, while he withdrew for a moment.

I saw him advance to the turret-like place, and exchange a confidential
word with the almond tree there, who immediately looked very much
surprised,—I thought, a little disconcerted,—and then disappeared with
him.

While my friend was gone, I occupied myself with looking around me, and
striving to appear as indifferent as possible, and as much used to all
this splendor as if I had been born in it. But, to tell the truth, my
head was almost dizzy with the strangeness of the sight, and the
thought that I was really in London. What would my brother have said?
What would Tom Legare, the treasurer of the Juvenile Temperance
Society, have thought?

But I almost began to fancy I had no friends and relatives living in a
little village three thousand five hundred miles off, in America; for
it was hard to unite such a humble reminiscence with the splendid
animation of the London-like scene around me.

And in the delirium of the moment, I began to indulge in foolish golden
visions of the counts and countesses to whom Harry might introduce me;
and every instant I expected to hear the waiters addressing some
gentleman as _“My Lord,”_ or _“four Grace.”_ But if there were really
any lords present, the waiters omitted their titles, at least in my
hearing.

Mixed with these thoughts were confused visions of St. Paul’s and the
Strand, which I determined to visit the very next morning, before
breakfast, or perish in the attempt. And I even longed for Harry’s
return, that we might immediately sally out into the street, and see
some of the sights, before the shops were all closed for the night.

While I thus sat alone, I observed one of the waiters eying me a little
impertinently, as I thought, and as if he saw something queer about me.
So I tried to assume a careless and lordly air, and by way of helping
the thing, threw one leg over the other, like a young Prince Esterhazy;
but all the time I felt my face burning with embarrassment, and for the
time, I must have looked very guilty of something. But spite of this, I
kept looking boldly out of my eyes, and straight through my blushes,
and observed that every now and then little parties were made up among
the gentlemen, and they retired into the rear of the house, as if going
to a private apartment. And I overheard one of them drop the word
_Rouge;_ but he could not have used rouge, for his face was exceedingly
pale. Another said something about _Loo._

At last Harry came back, his face rather flushed.

“Come along, Redburn,” said he.

So making no doubt we were off for a ramble, perhaps to Apsley House,
in the Park, to get a sly peep at the old Duke before he retired for
the night, for Harry had told me the Duke always went to bed early, I
sprang up to follow him; but what was my disappointment and surprise,
when he only led me into the passage, toward a staircase lighted by
three marble Graces, unitedly holding a broad candelabra, like an elk’s
antlers, over the landing.

We rambled up the long, winding slope of those aristocratic stairs,
every step of which, covered with Turkey rugs, looked gorgeous as the
hammer-cloth of the Lord Mayor’s coach; and Harry hied straight to a
rosewood door, which, on magical hinges, sprang softly open to his
touch.

As we entered the room, methought I was slowly sinking in some
reluctant, sedgy sea; so thick and elastic the Persian carpeting,
mimicking parterres of tulips, and roses, and jonquils, like a bower in
Babylon.

Long lounges lay carelessly disposed, whose fine damask was interwoven,
like the Gobelin tapestry, with pictorial tales of tilt and tourney.
And oriental ottomans, whose cunning warp and woof were wrought into
plaited serpents, undulating beneath beds of leaves, from which, here
and there, they flashed out sudden splendors of green scales and gold.

In the broad bay windows, as the hollows of King Charles’ oaks, were
Laocoon-like chairs, in the antique taste, draped with heavy fringes of
bullion and silk.

The walls, covered with a sort of tartan-French paper, variegated with
bars of velvet, were hung round with mythological oil-paintings,
suspended by tasseled cords of twisted silver and blue.

They were such pictures as the high-priests, for a bribe, showed to
Alexander in the innermost shrine of the white temple in the Libyan
oasis: such pictures as the pontiff of the sun strove to hide from
Cortez, when, sword in hand, he burst open the sanctorum of the
pyramid-fane at Cholula: such pictures as you may still see, perhaps,
in the central alcove of the excavated mansion of Pansa, in Pompeii—in
that part of it called by Varro _the hollow of the house:_ such
pictures as Martial and Seutonius mention as being found in the private
cabinet of the Emperor Tiberius: such pictures as are delineated on the
bronze medals, to this day dug up on the ancient island of Capreas:
such pictures as you might have beheld in an arched recess, leading
from the left hand of the secret side-gallery of the temple of
Aphrodite in Corinth.

In the principal pier was a marble bracket, sculptured in the semblance
of a dragon’s crest, and supporting a bust, most wonderful to behold.
It was that of a bald-headed old man, with a mysteriously-wicked
expression, and imposing silence by one thin finger over his lips. His
marble mouth seemed tremulous with secrets.

“Sit down, Wellingborough,” said Harry; “don’t be frightened, we are at
home.—Ring the bell, will you? But stop;”— and advancing to the
mysterious bust, he whispered something in its ear.

“He’s a knowing mute, Wellingborough,” said he; “who stays in this one
place all the time, while he is yet running of errands. But mind you
don’t breathe any secrets in his ear.”

In obedience to a summons so singularly conveyed, to my amazement a
servant almost instantly appeared, standing transfixed in the attitude
of a bow.

“Cigars,” said Harry. When they came, he drew up a small table into the
middle of the room, and lighting his cigar, bade me follow his example,
and make myself happy.

Almost transported with such princely quarters, so undreamed of before,
while leading my dog’s life in the filthy forecastle of the Highlander,
I twirled round a chair, and seated myself opposite my friend.

But all the time, I felt ill at heart; and was filled with an
undercurrent of dismal forebodings. But I strove to dispel them; and
turning to my companion, exclaimed, “And pray, do you live here, Harry,
in this Palace of Aladdin?”

“Upon my soul,” he cried, “you have hit it:—you must have been here
before! Aladdin’s Palace! Why, Wellingborough, it goes by that very
name.”

Then he laughed strangely: and for the first time, I thought he had
been quaffing too freely: yet, though he looked wildly from his eyes,
his general carriage was firm.

“Who are you looking at so hard, Wellingborough?” said he.

“I am afraid, Harry,” said I, “that when you left me just now, you must
have been drinking something stronger than wine.”

“Hear him now,” said Harry, turning round, as if addressing the
bald-headed bust on the bracket,—“a parson ’pon honor!—But remark you,
Wellingborough, my boy, I must leave you again, and for a considerably
longer time than before:—I may not be back again to-night.”

“What?” said I.

“Be still,” he cried, “hear me, I know the old duke here, and—”

“Who? not the Duke of Wellington,” said I, wondering whether Harry was
really going to include _him_ too, in his long list of confidential
friends and acquaintances.

“Pooh!” cried Harry, “I mean the white-whiskered old man you saw below;
they call him _the Duke:—he_ keeps the house. I say, I know him well,
and he knows _me;_ and he knows what brings me here, also. Well; we
have arranged every thing about you; you are to stay in this room, and
sleep here tonight, and—and—” continued he, speaking low—“you must
guard this letter—” slipping a sealed one into my hand—“and, if I am
not back by morning, you must post right on to Bury, and leave the
letter there;—here, take this paper—it’s all set down here in black and
white—where you are to go, and what you are to do. And after that’s
done—mind, this is all in case I don’t return—then you may do what you
please: stay here in London awhile, or go back to Liverpool. And here’s
enough to pay all your expenses.”

All this was a thunder stroke. I thought Harry was crazy. I held the
purse in my motionless hand, and stared at him, till the tears almost
started from my eyes.

“What’s the matter, Redburn?” he cried, with a wild sort of laugh—“you
are not afraid of me, are you?—No, no! I believe in you, my boy, or you
would not hold that purse in your hand; no, nor that letter.”

“What in heaven’s name do you mean?” at last I exclaimed, “you don’t
really intend to desert me in this strange place, do you, Harry?” and I
snatched him by the hand.

“Pooh, pooh,” he cried, “let me go. I tell you, it’s all right: do as I
say: that’s all. Promise me now, will you? Swear it!—no, no,” he added,
vehemently, as I conjured him to tell me more—“no, I won’t: I have
nothing more to tell you—not a word. Will you swear?”

“But one sentence more for your own sake, Harry: hear me!”

“Not a syllable! Will you swear?—you will not? then here, give me that
purse:—there—there—take that—and that—and that;—that will pay your fare
back to Liverpool; good-by to you: you are not my friend,” and he
wheeled round his back.

I know not what flashed through my mind, but something suddenly
impelled me; and grasping his hand, I swore to him what he demanded.

Immediately he ran to the bust, whispered a word, and the
white-whiskered old man appeared: whom he clapped on the shoulder, and
then introduced me as his friend—young Lord Stormont; and bade the
almond tree look well to the comforts of his lordship, while
he—Harry—was gone.

The almond tree blandly bowed, and grimaced, with a peculiar
expression, that I hated on the spot. After a few words more, he
withdrew. Harry then shook my hand heartily, and without giving me a
chance to say one word, seized his cap, and darted out of the room,
saying, “Leave not this room tonight; and remember the letter, and
Bury!”

I fell into a chair, and gazed round at the strange-looking walls and
mysterious pictures, and up to the chandelier at the ceiling; then
rose, and opened the door, and looked down the lighted passage; but
only heard the hum from the roomful below, scattered voices, and a
hushed ivory rattling from the closed apartments adjoining. I stepped
back into the room, and a terrible revulsion came over me: I would have
given the world had I been safe back in Liverpool, fast asleep in my
old bunk in Prince’s Dock.

I shuddered at every footfall, and almost thought it must be some
assassin pursuing me. The whole place seemed infected; and a strange
thought came over me, that in the very damasks around, some eastern
plague had been imported. And was that pale yellow wine, that I drank
below, drugged? thought I. This must be some house whose foundations
take hold on the pit. But these fearful reveries only enchanted me fast
to my chair; so that, though I then wished to rush forth from the
house, my limbs seemed manacled.

While thus chained to my seat, something seemed suddenly flung open; a
confused sound of imprecations, mixed with the ivory rattling, louder
than before, burst upon my ear, and through the partly open door of the
room where I was, I caught sight of a tall, frantic man, with clenched
hands, wildly darting through the passage, toward the stairs.

And all the while, Harry ran through my soul—in and out, at every door,
that burst open to his vehement rush.

At that moment my whole acquaintance with him passed like lightning
through my mind, till I asked myself why he had come here, to London,
to do this thing?—why would not Liverpool have answered? and what did
he want of me? But, every way, his conduct was unaccountable. From the
hour he had accosted me on board the ship, his manner seemed gradually
changed; and from the moment we had sprung into the cab, he had seemed
almost another person from what he had seemed before.

But what could I do? He was gone, that was certain;—would he ever come
back? But he might still be somewhere in the house; and with a shudder,
I thought of that ivory rattling, and was almost ready to dart forth,
search every room, and save him. But that would be madness, and I had
sworn not to do so. There seemed nothing left, but to await his return.
Yet, if he did not return, what then? I took out the purse, and counted
over the money, and looked at the letter and paper of memoranda.

Though I vividly remember it all, I will not give the superscription of
the letter, nor the contents of the paper. But after I had looked at
them attentively, and considered that Harry could have no conceivable
object in deceiving me, I thought to myself, Yes, he’s in earnest; and
here I am—yes, even in London! And here in this room will I stay, come
what will. I will implicitly follow his directions, and so see out the
last of this thing.

But spite of these thoughts, and spite of the metropolitan magnificence
around me, I was mysteriously alive to a dreadful feeling, which I had
never before felt, except when penetrating into the lowest and most
squalid haunts of sailor iniquity in Liverpool. All the mirrors and
marbles around me seemed crawling over with lizards; and I thought to
myself, that though gilded and golden, the serpent of vice is a serpent
still.

It was now grown very late; and faint with excitement, I threw myself
upon a lounge; but for some time tossed about restless, in a sort of
night-mare. Every few moments, spite of my oath, I was upon the point
of starting up, and rushing into the street, to inquire where I was;
but remembering Harry’s injunctions, and my own ignorance of the town,
and that it was now so late, I again tried to be composed.

At last, I fell asleep, dreaming about Harry fighting a duel of
dice-boxes with the military-looking man below; and the next thing I
knew, was the glare of a light before my eyes, and Harry himself, very
pale, stood before me.

“The letter and paper,” he cried.

I fumbled in my pockets, and handed them to him.

“There! there! there! thus I tear you,” he cried, wrenching the letter
to pieces with both hands like a madman, and stamping upon the
fragments. “I am off for America; the game is up.”

“For God’s sake explain,” said I, now utterly bewildered, and
frightened. “Tell me, Harry, what is it? You have not been gambling?”

“Ha, ha,” he deliriously laughed. “Gambling? red and white, you
mean?—cards?—dice?—the bones?—Ha, ha!—Gambling? gambling?” he ground
out between his teeth—“what two devilish, stiletto-sounding syllables
they are!”

“Wellingborough,” he added, marching up to me slowly, but with his eyes
blazing into mine—“Wellingborough”—and fumbling in his breast-pocket,
he drew forth a dirk—“Here, Wellingborough, take it—take it, I say—are
you stupid?—there, there”—and he pushed it into my hands. “Keep it away
from me—keep it out of my sight—I don’t want it near me, while I feel
as I do. They serve suicides scurvily here, Wellingborough; they don’t
bury them decently. See that bell-rope! By Heaven, it’s an invitation
to hang myself"—and seizing it by the gilded handle at the end, he
twitched it down from the wall.

“In God’s name, what ails you?” I cried.

“Nothing, oh nothing,” said Harry, now assuming a treacherous, tropical
calmness—“nothing, Redburn; nothing in the world. I’m the serenest of
men.”

“But give me that dirk,” he suddenly cried—“let me have it, I say. Oh!
I don’t mean to murder myself—I’m past that now—give it me”—and
snatching it from my hand, he flung down an empty purse, and with a
terrific stab, nailed it fast with the dirk to the table.

“There now,” he cried, “there’s something for the old duke to see
to-morrow morning; that’s about all that’s left of me— that’s my
skeleton, Wellingborough. But come, don’t be downhearted; there’s a
little more gold yet in Golconda; I have a guinea or two left. Don’t
stare so, my boy; we shall be in Liverpool to-morrow night; we start in
the morning”—and turning his back, he began to whistle very fiercely.

“And this, then,” said I, “is your showing me London, is it, Harry? I
did not think this; but tell me your secret, whatever it is, and I will
not regret not seeing the town.”

He turned round upon me like lightning, and cried, “Red-burn! you must
swear another oath, and instantly.”

“And why?” said I, in alarm, “what more would you have me swear?”

“Never to question me again about this infernal trip to London!” he
shouted, with the foam at his lips—“never to breathe it! swear!”

“I certainly shall not trouble you, Harry, with questions, if you do
not desire it,” said I, “but there’s no need of swearing.”

“Swear it, I say, as you love me, Redburn,” he added, imploringly.

“Well, then, I solemnly do. Now lie down, and let us forget ourselves
as soon as we can; for me, you have made me the most miserable dog
alive.”

“And what am I?” cried Harry; “but pardon me, Redburn, I did not mean
to offend; if you knew all—but no, no!—never mind, never mind!” And he
ran to the bust, and whispered in its ear. A waiter came.

“Brandy,” whispered Harry, with clenched teeth.

“Are you not going to sleep, then?” said I, more and more alarmed at
his wildness, and fearful of the effects of his drinking still more, in
such a mood.

“No sleep for me! sleep if _you_ can—I mean to sit up with a
decanter!—let me see”—looking at the ormolu clock on the mantel—“it’s
only two hours to morning.”

The waiter, looking very sleepy, and with a green shade on his brow,
appeared with the decanter and glasses on a salver, and was told to
leave it and depart.

Seeing that Harry was not to be moved, I once more threw myself on the
lounge. I did not sleep; but, like a somnambulist, only dozed now and
then; starting from my dreams; while Harry sat, with his hat on, at the
table; the brandy before him; from which he occasionally poured into
his glass. Instead of exciting him, however, to my amazement, the
spirits seemed to soothe him down; and, ere long, he was comparatively
calm.

At last, just as I had fallen into a deep sleep, I was wakened by his
shaking me, and saying our cab was at the door.

“Look! it is broad day,” said he, brushing aside the heavy hangings of
the window.

We left the room; and passing through the now silent and deserted hall
of pillars, which, at this hour, reeked as with blended roses and
cigar-stumps decayed; a dumb waiter; rubbing his eyes, flung open the
street door; we sprang into the cab; and soon found ourselves whirled
along northward by railroad, toward Prince’s Dock and the Highlander.

PLACARDS, BRASS-JEWELERS, TRUCK-HORSES, AND STEAMERS

As I wish to group together what fell under my observation concerning
the Liverpool docks, and the scenes roundabout, I will try to throw
into this chapter various minor things that I recall.

The advertisements of pauperism chalked upon the flagging round the
dock walls, are singularly accompanied by a multitude of quite
different announcements, placarded upon the walls themselves. They are
principally notices of the approaching departure of _“superior,
fast-sailing, coppered and copper-fastened ships,”_ for the United
States, Canada, New South Wales, and other places. Interspersed with
these, are the advertisements of Jewish clothesmen, informing the
judicious seamen where he can procure of the best and the cheapest;
together with ambiguous medical announcements of the tribe of quacks
and empirics who prey upon all seafaring men. Not content with thus
publicly giving notice of their whereabouts, these indefatigable
Sangrados and pretended Samaritans hire a parcel of shabby
workhouse-looking knaves, whose business consists in haunting the dock
walls about meal times, and silently thrusting mysterious little
billets—duodecimo editions of the larger advertisements—into the
astonished hands of the tars.

They do this, with such a mysterious hang-dog wink; such a sidelong
air; such a villainous assumption of your necessities; that, at first,
you are almost tempted to knock them down for their pains.

Conspicuous among the notices on the walls, are huge Italic inducements
to all seamen disgusted with the merchant service, to accept a round
bounty, and embark in her Majesty’s navy.

In the British armed marine, in time of peace, they do not ship men for
the general service, as in the American navy; but for particular ships,
going upon particular cruises. Thus, the frigate Thetis may be
announced as about to sail under the command of that fine old sailor,
and noble father to his crew, _Lord George Flagstaff._

Similar announcements may be seen upon the walls concerning enlistments
in the army. And never did auctioneer dilate with more rapture upon the
charms of some country-seat put up for sale, than the authors of these
placards do, upon the beauty and salubrity of the distant climes, for
which the regiments wanting recruits are about to sail. Bright lawns,
vine-clad hills, endless meadows of verdure, here make up the
landscape; and adventurous young gentlemen, fond of travel, are
informed, that here is a chance for them to see the world at their
leisure, and be paid for enjoying themselves into the bargain. The
regiments for India are promised plantations among valleys of palms;
while to those destined for New Holland, a novel sphere of life and
activity is opened; and the companies bound to Canada and Nova Scotia
are lured by tales of summer suns, that ripen grapes in December. No
word of war is breathed; hushed is the clang of arms in these
announcements; and the sanguine recruit is almost tempted to expect
that pruning-hooks, instead of swords, will be the weapons he will
wield.

Alas! is not this the cruel stratagem of Bruce at Bannockburn, who
decoyed to his war-pits by covering them over with green boughs? For
instead of a farm at the blue base of the Himalayas, the Indian recruit
encounters the keen saber of the Sikh; and instead of basking in sunny
bowers, the Canadian soldier stands a shivering sentry upon the bleak
ramparts of Quebec, a lofty mark for the bitter blasts from Baffin’s
Bay and Labrador. There, as his eye sweeps down the St. Lawrence, whose
every billow is bound for the main that laves the shore of Old England;
as he thinks of his long term of enlistment, which sells him to the
army as Doctor Faust sold himself to the devil; how the poor fellow
must groan in his grief, and call to mind the church-yard stile, and
his Mary.

These army announcements are well fitted to draw recruits in Liverpool.
Among the vast number of emigrants, who daily arrive from all parts of
Britain to embark for the United States or the colonies, there are many
young men, who, upon arriving at Liverpool, find themselves next to
penniless; or, at least, with only enough money to carry them over the
sea, without providing for future contingencies. How easily and
naturally, then, may such youths be induced to enter upon the military
life, which promises them a free passage to the most distant and
flourishing colonies, and certain pay for doing nothing; besides
holding out hopes of vineyards and farms, to be verified in the
fullness of time. For in a moneyless youth, the decision to leave home
at all, and embark upon a long voyage to reside in a remote clime, is a
piece of adventurousness only one removed from the spirit that prompts
the army recruit to enlist.

I never passed these advertisements, surrounded by crowds of gaping
emigrants, without thinking of rattraps.

Besides the mysterious agents of the quacks, who privily thrust their
little notes into your hands, folded up like a powder; there are
another set of rascals prowling about the docks, chiefly at dusk; who
make strange motions to you, and beckon you to one side, as if they had
some state secret to disclose, intimately connected with the weal of
the commonwealth. They nudge you with an elbow full of indefinite hints
and intimations; they glitter upon you an eye like a Jew’s or a
pawnbroker’s; they dog you like Italian assassins. But if the blue coat
of a policeman chances to approach, how quickly they strive to look
completely indifferent, as to the surrounding universe; how they
saunter off, as if lazily wending their way to an affectionate wife and
family.

The first time one of these mysterious personages accosted me, I
fancied him crazy, and hurried forward to avoid him. But arm in arm
with my shadow, he followed after; till amazed at his conduct, I turned
round and paused.

He was a little, shabby, old man, with a forlorn looking coat and hat;
and his hand was fumbling in his vest pocket, as if to take out a card
with his address. Seeing me stand still he made a sign toward a dark
angle of the wall, near which we were; when taking him for a cunning
foot-pad, I again wheeled about, and swiftly passed on. But though I
did not look round, I _felt_ him following me still; so once more I
stopped. The fellow now assumed so mystic and admonitory an air, that I
began to fancy he came to me on some warning errand; that perhaps a
plot had been laid to blow up the Liverpool docks, and he was some
Monteagle bent upon accomplishing my flight. I was determined to see
what he was. With all my eyes about me, I followed him into the arch of
a warehouse; when he gazed round furtively, and silently showing me a
ring, whispered, “You may have it for a shilling; it’s pure gold—I
found it in the gutter—hush! don’t speak! give me the money, and it’s
yours.”

“My friend,” said I, “I don’t trade in these articles; I don’t want
your ring.”

“Don’t you? Then take that,” he whispered, in an intense hushed
passion; and I fell flat from a blow on the chest, while this infamous
jeweler made away with himself out of sight. This business transaction
was conducted with a counting-house promptitude that astonished me.

After that, I shunned these scoundrels like the leprosy: and the next
time I was pertinaciously followed, I stopped, and in a loud voice,
pointed out the man to the passers-by; upon which he absconded; rapidly
turning up into sight a pair of obliquely worn and battered boot-heels.
I could not help thinking that these sort of fellows, so given to
running away upon emergencies, must furnish a good deal of work to the
shoemakers; as they might, also, to the growers of hemp and
gallows-joiners.

Belonging to a somewhat similar fraternity with these irritable
merchants of brass jewelry just mentioned, are the peddlers of
Sheffield razors, mostly boys, who are hourly driven out of the dock
gates by the police; nevertheless, they contrive to saunter back, and
board the vessels, going among the sailors and privately exhibiting
their wares. Incited by the extreme cheapness of one of the razors, and
the gilding on the case containing it, a shipmate of mine purchased it
on the spot for a commercial equivalent of the price, in tobacco. On
the following Sunday, he used that razor; and the result was a pair of
tormented and tomahawked cheeks, that almost required a surgeon to
dress them. In old times, by the way, it was not a bad thought, that
suggested the propriety of a barber’s practicing surgery in connection
with the chin-harrowing vocation.

Another class of knaves, who practice upon the sailors in Liverpool,
are the pawnbrokers, inhabiting little rookeries among the narrow lanes
adjoining the dock. I was astonished at the multitude of gilded balls
in these streets, emblematic of their calling. They were generally next
neighbors to the gilded grapes over the spirit-vaults; and no doubt,
mutually to facilitate business operations, some of these
establishments have connecting doors inside, so as to play their
customers into each other’s hands. I often saw sailors in a state of
intoxication rushing from a spirit-vault into a pawnbroker’s; stripping
off their boots, hats, jackets, and neckerchiefs, and sometimes even
their pantaloons on the spot, and offering to pawn them for a song. Of
course such applications were never refused. But though on shore, at
Liverpool, poor Jack finds more sharks than at sea, he himself is by no
means exempt from practices, that do not savor of a rigid morality; at
least according to law. In tobacco smuggling he is an adept: and when
cool and collected, often manages to evade the Customs completely, and
land goodly packages of the weed, which owing to the immense duties
upon it in England, commands a very high price.

As soon as we came to anchor in the river, before reaching the dock,
three Custom-house underlings boarded us, and coming down into the
forecastle, ordered the men to produce all the tobacco they had.
Accordingly several pounds were brought forth.

“Is that all?” asked the officers.

“All,” said the men.

“We will see,” returned the others.

And without more ado, they emptied the chests right and left; tossed
over the bunks and made a thorough search of the premises; but
discovered nothing. The sailors were then given to understand, that
while the ship lay in dock, the tobacco must remain in the cabin, under
custody of the chief mate, who every morning would dole out to them one
plug per head, as a security against their carrying it ashore.

“Very good,” said the men.

But several of them had secret places in the ship, from whence they
daily drew pound after pound of tobacco, which they smuggled ashore in
the manner following.

When the crew went to meals, each man carried at least one plug in his
pocket; _that_ he had a right to; and as many more were hidden about
his person as he dared. Among the great crowds pouring out of the
dock-gates at such hours, of course these smugglers stood little chance
of detection; although vigilant looking policemen were always standing
by. And though these _“Charlies”_ might suppose there were tobacco
smugglers passing; yet to hit the right man among such a throng, would
be as hard, as to harpoon a speckled porpoise, one of ten thousand
darting under a ship’s bows.

Our forecastle was often visited by foreign sailors, who knowing we
came from America, were anxious to purchase tobacco at a cheap rate;
for in Liverpool it is about an American penny per pipe-full. Along the
docks they sell an English pennyworth, put up in a little roll like
confectioners’ mottoes, with poetical lines, or instructive little
moral precepts printed in red on the back.

Among all the sights of the docks, the noble truck-horses are not the
least striking to a stranger. They are large and powerful brutes, with
such sleek and glossy coats, that they look as if brushed and put on by
a valet every morning. They march with a slow and stately step, lifting
their ponderous hoofs like royal Siam elephants. Thou shalt not lay
stripes upon these Roman citizens; for their docility is such, they are
guided without rein or lash; they go or come, halt or march on, at a
whisper. So grave, dignified, gentlemanly, and courteous did these fine
truck-horses look—so full of calm intelligence and sagacity, that often
I endeavored to get into conversation with them, as they stood in
contemplative attitudes while their loads were preparing. But all I
could get from them was the mere recognition of a friendly neigh;
though I would stake much upon it that, could I have spoken in their
language, I would have derived from them a good deal of valuable
information touching the docks, where they passed the whole of their
dignified lives.

There are unknown worlds of knowledge in brutes; and whenever you mark
a horse, or a dog, with a peculiarly mild, calm, deep-seated eye, be
sure he is an Aristotle or a Kant, tranquilly speculating upon the
mysteries in man. No philosophers so thoroughly comprehend us as dogs
and horses. They see through us at a glance. And after all, what is a
horse but a species of four-footed dumb man, in a leathern overall, who
happens to live upon oats, and toils for his masters, half-requited or
abused, like the biped hewers of wood and drawers of water? But there
is a touch of divinity even in brutes, and a special halo about a
horse, that should forever exempt him from indignities. As for those
majestic, magisterial truck-horses of the docks, I would as soon think
of striking a judge on the bench, as to lay violent hand upon their
holy hides.

It is wonderful what loads their majesties will condescend to draw. The
truck is a large square platform, on four low wheels; and upon this the
lumpers pile bale after bale of cotton, as if they were filling a large
warehouse, and yet a procession of three of these horses will
tranquilly walk away with the whole.

The truckmen themselves are almost as singular a race as their animals.
Like the Judiciary in England, they wear gowns,—not of the same cut and
color though,—which reach below their knees; and from the racket they
make on the pavements with their hob-nailed brogans, you would think
they patronized the same shoemaker with their horses. I never could get
any thing out of these truckmen. They are a reserved, sober-sided set,
who, with all possible solemnity, march at the head of their animals;
now and then gently advising them to sheer to the right or the left, in
order to avoid some passing vehicle. Then spending so much of their
lives in the high-bred company of their horses, seems to have mended
their manners and improved their taste, besides imparting to them
something of the dignity of their animals; but it has also given to
them a sort of refined and uncomplaining aversion to human society.

There are many strange stories told of the truck-horse. Among others is
the following: There was a parrot, that from having long been suspended
in its cage from a low window fronting a dock, had learned to converse
pretty fluently in the language of the stevedores and truckmen. One day
a truckman left his vehicle standing on the quay, with its back to the
water. It was noon, when an interval of silence falls upon the docks;
and Poll, seeing herself face to face with the horse, and having a mind
for a chat, cried out to him, _“Back! back! back!”_

Backward went the horse, precipitating himself and truck into the
water.

Brunswick Dock, to the west of Prince’s, is one of the most interesting
to be seen. Here lie the various black steamers (so unlike the American
boats, since they have to navigate the boisterous Narrow Seas) plying
to all parts of the three kingdoms. Here you see vast quantities of
produce, imported from starving Ireland; here you see the decks turned
into pens for oxen and sheep; and often, side by side with these
inclosures, Irish deck-passengers, thick as they can stand, seemingly
penned in just like the cattle. It was the beginning of July when the
Highlander arrived in port; and the Irish laborers were daily coming
over by thousands, to help harvest the English crops.

One morning, going into the town, I heard a tramp, as of a drove of
buffaloes, behind me; and turning round, beheld the entire middle of
the street filled by a great crowd of these men, who had just emerged
from Brunswick Dock gates, arrayed in long-tailed coats of hoddin-gray,
corduroy knee-breeches, and shod with shoes that raised a mighty dust.
Flourishing their Donnybrook shillelahs, they looked like an irruption
of barbarians. They were marching straight out of town into the
country; and perhaps out of consideration for the finances of the
corporation, took the middle of the street, to save the side-walks.

“Sing _Langolee, and the Lakes of Killarney,”_ cried one fellow,
tossing his stick into the air, as he danced in his brogans at the head
of the rabble. And so they went! capering on, merry as pipers.

When I thought of the multitudes of Irish that annually land on the
shores of the United States and Canada, and, to my surprise, witnessed
the additional multitudes embarking from Liverpool to New Holland; and
when, added to all this, I daily saw these hordes of laborers,
descending, thick as locusts, upon the English corn-fields; I could not
help marveling at the fertility of an island, which, though her crop of
potatoes may fail, never yet failed in bringing her annual crop of men
into the world.

WHAT REDBURN SAW IN LAUNCELOTT’S-HEY

The dead-house reminds me of other sad things; for in the vicinity of
the docks are many very painful sights.

In going to our boarding-house, the sign of the Baltimore Clipper, I
generally passed through a narrow street called “Launcelott’s-Hey,”
lined with dingy, prison-like cotton warehouses. In this street, or
rather alley, you seldom see any one but a truck-man, or some solitary
old warehouse-keeper, haunting his smoky den like a ghost.

Once, passing through this place, I heard a feeble wail, which seemed
to come out of the earth. It was but a strip of crooked side-walk where
I stood; the dingy wall was on every side, converting the mid-day into
twilight; and not a soul was in sight. I started, and could almost have
run, when I heard that dismal sound. It seemed the low, hopeless,
endless wail of some one forever lost. At last I advanced to an opening
which communicated downward with deep tiers of cellars beneath a
crumbling old warehouse; and there, some fifteen feet below the walk,
crouching in nameless squalor, with her head bowed over, was the figure
of what had been a woman. Her blue arms folded to her livid bosom two
shrunken things like children, that leaned toward her, one on each
side. At first, I knew not whether they were alive or dead. They made
no sign; they did not move or stir; but from the vault came that
soul-sickening wail.

I made a noise with my foot, which, in the silence, echoed far and
near; but there was no response. Louder still; when one of the children
lifted its head, and cast upward a faint glance; then closed its eyes,
and lay motionless. The woman also, now gazed up, and perceived me; but
let fall her eye again. They were dumb and next to dead with want. How
they had crawled into that den, I could not tell; but there they had
crawled to die. At that moment I never thought of relieving them; for
death was so stamped in their glazed and unimploring eyes, that I
almost regarded them as already no more. I stood looking down on them,
while my whole soul swelled within me; and I asked myself, What right
had any body in the wide world to smile and be glad, when sights like
this were to be seen? It was enough to turn the heart to gall; and make
a man-hater of a Howard. For who were these ghosts that I saw? Were
they not human beings? A woman and two girls? With eyes, and lips, and
ears like any queen? with hearts which, though they did not bound with
blood, yet beat with a dull, dead ache that was their life.

At last, I walked on toward an open lot in the alley, hoping to meet
there some ragged old women, whom I had daily noticed groping amid foul
rubbish for little particles of dirty cotton, which they washed out and
sold for a trifle.

I found them; and accosting one, I asked if she knew of the persons I
had just left. She replied, that she did not; nor did she want to. I
then asked another, a miserable, toothless old woman, with a tattered
strip of coarse baling stuff round her body. Looking at me for an
instant, she resumed her raking in the rubbish, and said that she knew
who it was that I spoke of; but that she had no time to attend to
beggars and their brats. Accosting still another, who seemed to know my
errand, I asked if there was no place to which the woman could be
taken. “Yes,” she replied, “to the church-yard.” I said she was alive,
and not dead.

“Then she’ll never die,” was the rejoinder. “She’s been down there
these three days, with nothing to eat;—that I know myself.”

“She desarves it,” said an old hag, who was just placing on her crooked
shoulders her bag of pickings, and who was turning to totter off, “that
Betsy Jennings desarves it—was she ever married? tell me that.”

Leaving Launcelott’s-Hey, I turned into a more frequented street; and
soon meeting a policeman, told him of the condition of the woman and
the girls.

“It’s none of my business, Jack,” said he. “I don’t belong to that
street.”

“Who does then?”

“I don’t know. But what business is it of yours? Are you not a Yankee?”

“Yes,” said I, “but come, I will help you remove that woman, if you say
so.”

“There, now, Jack, go on board your ship and stick to it; and leave
these matters to the town.”

I accosted two more policemen, but with no better success; they would
not even go with me to the place. The truth was, it was out of the way,
in a silent, secluded spot; and the misery of the three outcasts,
hiding away in the ground, did not obtrude upon any one.

Returning to them, I again stamped to attract their attention; but this
time, none of the three looked up, or even stirred. While I yet stood
irresolute, a voice called to me from a high, iron-shuttered window in
a loft over the way; and asked what I was about. I beckoned to the man,
a sort of porter, to come down, which he did; when I pointed down into
the vault.

“Well,” said he, “what of it?”

“Can’t we get them out?” said I, “haven’t you some place in your
warehouse where you can put them? have you nothing for them to eat?”

“You’re crazy, boy,” said he; “do you suppose, that Parkins and Wood
want their warehouse turned into a hospital?”

I then went to my boarding-house, and told Handsome Mary of what I had
seen; asking her if she could not do something to get the woman and
girls removed; or if she could not do that, let me have some food for
them. But though a kind person in the main, Mary replied that she gave
away enough to beggars in her own street (which was true enough)
without looking after the whole neighborhood.

Going into the kitchen, I accosted the cook, a little shriveled-up old
Welshwoman, with a saucy tongue, whom the sailors called _Brandy-Nan;_
and begged her to give me some cold victuals, if she had nothing
better, to take to the vault. But she broke out in a storm of swearing
at the miserable occupants of the vault, and refused. I then stepped
into the room where our dinner was being spread; and waiting till the
girl had gone out, I snatched some bread and cheese from a stand, and
thrusting it into the bosom of my frock, left the house. Hurrying to
the lane, I dropped the food down into the vault. One of the girls
caught at it convulsively, but fell back, apparently fainting; the
sister pushed the other’s arm aside, and took the bread in her hand;
but with a weak uncertain grasp like an infant’s. She placed it to her
mouth; but letting it fall again, murmuring faintly something like
“water.” The woman did not stir; her head was bowed over, just as I had
first seen her.

Seeing how it was, I ran down toward the docks to a mean little sailor
tavern, and begged for a pitcher; but the cross old man who kept it
refused, unless I would pay for it. But I had no money. So as my
boarding-house was some way off, and it would be lost time to run to
the ship for my big iron pot; under the impulse of the moment, I
hurried to one of the Boodle Hydrants, which I remembered having seen
running near the scene of a still smoldering fire in an old rag house;
and taking off a new tarpaulin hat, which had been loaned me that day,
filled it with water.

With this, I returned to Launcelott’s-Hey; and with considerable
difficulty, like getting down into a well, I contrived to descend with
it into the vault; where there was hardly space enough left to let me
stand. The two girls drank out of the hat together; looking up at me
with an unalterable, idiotic expression, that almost made me faint. The
woman spoke not a word, and did not stir. While the girls were breaking
and eating the bread, I tried to lift the woman’s head; but, feeble as
she was, she seemed bent upon holding it down. Observing her arms still
clasped upon her bosom, and that something seemed hidden under the rags
there, a thought crossed my mind, which impelled me forcibly to
withdraw her hands for a moment; when I caught a glimpse of a meager
little babe—the lower part of its body thrust into an old bonnet. Its
face was dazzlingly white, even in its squalor; but the closed eyes
looked like balls of indigo. It must have been dead some hours.

The woman refusing to speak, eat, or drink, I asked one of the girls
who they were, and where they lived; but she only stared vacantly,
muttering something that could not be understood.

The air of the place was now getting too much for me; but I stood
deliberating a moment, whether it was possible for me to drag them out
of the vault. But if I did, what then? They would only perish in the
street, and here they were at least protected from the rain; and more
than that, might die in seclusion.

I crawled up into the street, and looking down upon them again, almost
repented that I had brought them any food; for it would only tend to
prolong their misery, without hope of any permanent relief: for die
they must very soon; they were too far gone for any medicine to help
them. I hardly know whether I ought to confess another thing that
occurred to me as I stood there; but it was this—I felt an almost
irresistible impulse to do them the last mercy, of in some way putting
an end to their horrible lives; and I should almost have done so, I
think, had I not been deterred by thoughts of the law. For I well knew
that the law, which would let them perish of themselves without giving
them one cup of water, would spend a thousand pounds, if necessary, in
convicting him who should so much as offer to relieve them from their
miserable existence.

The next day, and the next, I passed the vault three times, and still
met the same sight. The girls leaning up against the woman on each
side, and the woman with her arms still folding the babe, and her head
bowed. The first evening I did not see the bread that I had dropped
down in the morning; but the second evening, the bread I had dropped
that morning remained untouched. On the third morning the smell that
came from the vault was such, that I accosted the same policeman I had
accosted before, who was patrolling the same street, and told him that
the persons I had spoken to him about were dead, and he had better have
them removed. He looked as if he did not believe me, and added, that it
was not his street.

When I arrived at the docks on my way to the ship, I entered the
guard-house within the walls, and asked for one of the captains, to
whom I told the story; but, from what he said, was led to infer that
the Dock Police was distinct from that of the town, and this was not
the right place to lodge my information.

I could do no more that morning, being obliged to repair to the ship;
but at twelve o’clock, when I went to dinner, I hurried into
Launcelott’s-Hey, when I found that the vault was empty. In place of
the women and children, a heap of quick-lime was glistening.

I could not learn who had taken them away, or whither they had gone;
but my prayer was answered—they were dead, departed, and at peace.

But again I looked down into the vault, and in fancy beheld the pale,
shrunken forms still crouching there. Ah! what are our creeds, and how
do we hope to be saved? Tell me, oh Bible, that story of Lazarus again,
that I may find comfort in my heart for the poor and forlorn.
Surrounded as we are by the wants and woes of our fellowmen, and yet
given to follow our own pleasures, regardless of their pains, are we
not like people sitting up with a corpse, and making merry in the house
of the dead?

